---
title: Solitude
layout: post
---

Finding solitude is very important now. We used to have it growing up because we didn't have phones and we didn't have the TV on all the time. Now we have a smart phone and we constantly check the same 5 apps all day long. We live in a world where all we do is just look down at our phones while these companies just monopolize our time by showing us ads.

Not only are they profiting because of our time on their products, but most of the time when we are on their products it makes us less productive. When we use their products, we aren't focused on deep work. We are doing something stupid. And even if we aren't on Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, etc., we are not doing deep work. Checking emails on your phone isn't the most productive way to check emails. Being at a computer is the most effective place to work.

When you have your phone out when you're home, you are more likely to miss exciting moments with your family. I need to be more engaged with my son and wife than I am in riots that are happening in cities that are states away from me. Anything on the news is rarely news worthy and rarely changes my life.

## Solitude from Social Media

There are a few types of people on social media. The person chasing likes, the person checking out some random subset of memes and the connector who is trying to stay in touch with a core group of people.

To the person chasing likes: No one cares about you. If someone liked your post, it doesn't matter. The moment you stop posting, they will forget about you. Don't worry about those people. You're better served living your life with your close friends and making those relationships stronger.

To the person checking out some random subset of memes: You won't miss anything. Memes will come and go. Your life won't change if you don't see every meme. This is a fine way to entertain yourself from time to time, but it overwhelms you and nothing good will come of it.

To the person trying to stay in touch with a core group of people: Is it worth all the downside of social media to stay in touch with these people? It might be. I don't know. But I know for most people, the cons of social media aren't worth the pros of it. There are other ways that are probably more intimate and meaningful to stay in touch with these people than social media.

## Solitude from Working on your phone

Working on your phone is just awful. Unless all you do is make phone calls, it is worth investing in a computer. Better yet, find a job where you don't need computers to do your job. When you work on your phone, you can't concentrate. It's not great at typing long thoughts. It's difficult to search for something on the web then put it in your emails. It's just not that efficient. And if it isn't that efficient, then why do it that way?

And rarely is working on your phone, the reason why you are successful. For instance, Malcolm Gladwell doesn't have a twitter. You'd think that a writer would need to have a twitter to be successful because every writer has a twitter. Nope. His audience isn't interested in what he thinks about in around 140 characters. They care about what he has to say in a 200 page book on one topic. So why spend his time "working" on something that has little to no return. He's probably an extreme example because he already has a huge audience, but the same principle holds true for us regular people. Work we do on our phone rarely has a measurable impact on our success.

## Solitude from news

News rarely has a meaningful impact on our lives. Now that we have 24/7 news, I'd venture to say that's more true than ever before. The news we see now is not the facts. The news we see now are opinions and only the stories that fit the narrative of whoever is telling the story. There are news stations that are very left leaning and the news they share only fits that narrative. If they show other news, they will bend it *(or just lie)* to fit their narrative. Same with right leaning news sources. There is no unbiased news anymore.

When you don't listen to the news, your life gets better. I live in a fairly mixed little neighborhood. I have some black, hispanic and white neighbors. I'm closer to all of them now than I was a few months ago. The news tells me there is a racial divide between whites and minorities, but I don't feel that with my neighbors.

On a national level, there is probably a reason for the riots, but on a neighborhood level, things are getting better every day.

## Solitude from games

Entertainment is important. Games are fun. Games on your phone are not fun. They are addictive to the point where you can spend hours and only play them when you are tethered to your power cord. They are designed to keep on playing for as long as possible. That just isn't sustainable. For a random day it's fine, but for a long term habit, it kills your productivity and happiness.

If you'd rather play a game on your phone than play a game with your spouse, then something is wrong. You are addicted to your phone.

---
# Solutions

Living in a digital world is very difficult to not live with a smart phone. They are what's marketed on every media imaginable. They are what you see when you walk into any store. Think about it, tech companies make the most money from when you use products that make you spend the most time on them, so of course they will encourage you to buy these types of products.

The obvious solution would be to get a classic flip phone, but that type of cold turkey change would probably destroy most of us. After a few weeks, it would probably feel amazing though. I've considered doing something like this for a while and when my iPhone 8+ finally dies, this is the route I'm going to take.

## Delete all apps

A smartphone is a phone that has tools. Keep the tools you need and delete what you don't need. A lot of people have apps galore on your phone for everything imaginable. You can even download an app called S.M.T.H. (send me to heaven) where you throw your phone up as high as you can and it calculates how high of a throw you had. Completely unnecessary.

The apps that you keep are the apps that are tools that make your life better. What apps would those be normally?

* Phone
* Texts
* Calendar
* Alarm Clocks
* Notes

Basically the apps that were on the original iPhone. It was marketed as an iPod that made phone calls. So keeping it as basic as that. Before I started this, I had 3 screens on my iPhone filled with apps and folders filled with apps. Doing this a little at a time, I've deleted about half the apps. There was a little bit of anxiety on deleting some of them, but also a liberated feeling after doing them. My biggest problem right now is all the work from home stuff. I have an app that does group texts with my small group from church. I don't want to delete that, but it serves a single purpose. Once life gets back to normal, the app is gone.

## Classic phones

A tool that has a very specific purpose is a very good tool. Unfortunately, smart phones don't have a specific purpose. They are for games, work, scheduling, emails, calls, texts, cameras, etc. They can do everything pretty okay.

A classic phone does one thing well. Make phone calls. If you want a phone, get that. That way you can stay focused on the moment.

## Use data limits to your advantage

If you don't want to give up your smart phone (I don't really want to), then airplane mode can be your friend. I've set up social media apps to not use my data so I can only look at them when I'm at a place where I know the wifi password. Then a lot of those apps are worthless once I get out of my house. Which is great. I don't need to be scrolling on Instagram when I'm out on a walk with my dog or son.

It makes it inconvenient enough for when I have the urge to turn my brain off and distract myself for a few minutes. I'm not getting rid of these tools, because they serve a purpose in my life, but now I'm not controlled by them. I control them.

## Out of site

Most of the time I pick up my phone is when I'm bored and it's within arms reach. If I'm bored and I can see it, I might get up and check it. If I'm bored and I can't see it, there's a good chance I'm just going to stay bored and not get my phone. I'm pretty lazy.

Keeping it out of site might seem like a small change that won't do much, but it's a big change. Here's a [link](https://www.medicaldaily.com/out-sight-out-mind-cell-phones-may-diminish-cognitive-ability-even-without-use-313590) that can explain it better than me.

When we keep our phones out of site, we don't have the desire to check it. That's what we need to focus on. The random pickups we do on our phone. Every time we do one of those, even to just check the time, distracts us and we have to get in *the zone* again. Unfortunately, it isn't as easy as just jumping back into whatever we were working on. It takes time to jump back into whatever it was. So that 10 second glance at your notifications ends up costing you 10 minutes or more. Imagine doing that every 10 minutes. Your workday is gone. You'll never acheive your potential like that.

## Make it boring

Make your phone boring. If you turn it to black and white, that might help. If you turn it off every time you aren't using it that also might help. If my phone is constantly off until I need to do something it's going to take a minute or two to power on so I'll probably just keep it off unless it's important.

Turning off notifications is crucial. Every time your phone dings, it distracts you and makes you want to look at it. It's like playing slots. It could be important, but it probably isn't. Your brain gets excited and wants to check it out, but by the time you're ready to get back to work, your brain is still distracted. So that little ding to tell you that some social media app did something mildly dumb, you lost a lot of your productivity.

---

These phones are supposed to be tools, but they aren't tools for us. They are tools for the big tech companies that want to control you and control what you see and control how they monitize you. That isn't right. Sure, we checked the box that said we agree to their terms and service, but it's nevertheless obsurd.

I don't want to be controled by my smart phone, which is the way the world is right now. I want to control my own life. I can't do it if I am constantly looking at my phone.
